README.MD, before:

[Russian](/README_RU.MD)

> [!WARNING] jwt-cpp
> Currently, [cpp-jwt](https://github.com/arun11299/cpp-jwt) is used as the JWT library.
> In the future, this library will be replaced by [cpp-jwt](https://github.com/Thalhammer/jwt-cpp).

## Technical Description of the Json-RPC-Based Authentication System

### Usage Example

Direct usage:

```c++
// Service configuration
AuthServiceSettings settings;
settings.userStorages.push_back(std::make_unique<QSqlUserStorage>());
settings.authStorage = std::make_unique<MemAuthStorage>();

// Service creation
auto authService = new AuthService(std::move(settings));

// Authentication
auto result = authService->login("username", "password");
if (result.contains("error")) {
    // Error handling
} else {
    QString token = result["token"].toString();
    // Token usage
}

// Authentication check
bool isAuthenticated = authService->checkAuth(token);

// Session termination
authService->logout(token);
```

Creating an HTTP Json-RPC service:

```c++
#include <QtCore>
#include <auth_service.h>
#include <qjsonrpc/qjsonrpchttpserver.h>
#include <user_storage/qsql_user_storage.h>
#include <auth_storage/mem_auth_storage.h>

int main() {
   QCoreApplication app(argc, argv);
   
   QJsonRpcHttpServer rpcServer;
   AuthServiceSettings authSettings;
   
   authSettings.authStorage = std::make_unique<MemAuthStorage>();
   authSettings.userStorages.emplace_back(std::move(std::make_unique<QSqlUserStorage>()));
   
   rpcServer.addService(new AuthService(std::move(authSettings), &rpcServer));
   if (!rpcServer.listen(QHostAddress::LocalHost, 7777)) {
      std::cerr << "Failed to start server" << std::endl;
      return 1;
   }
   
   return app.exec();
}
```

### Architecture

#### Architecture Overview

The authentication system is built on a modular architecture, divided into several key components:

- **AuthService** — the main service providing a JSON-RPC API for authentication
- **IUserStorage** — interface for interacting with the user storage
- **IAuthStorage** — interface for interacting with the session storage
- **QSqlUserStorage** — implementation of IUserStorage for working with an SQL database
- **MemAuthStorage** — implementation of IAuthStorage for storing sessions in memory

```mermaid
---
title: Server Architecture
---
classDiagram
    direction LR

    namespace Configuration {
        class IServiceConfig {
            <<interface>>
            +getServiceConfig(name) QJsonValue
        }
        class IUserConfig {
            <<interface>>
            +getUserConfig(name) QJsonValue
        }
        class IAuthConfig {
            <<interface>>
            +getAuthConfig(name) QJsonValue
        }
        class JsonConfiguration {
            +getServiceConfig(name) QJsonValue
            +getAuthConfig(name) QJsonValue
            +getAuthConfig(name) QJsonValue
        }
    }

    class AuthService {
        #auths
        #users
        #serviceConfig
        slot +login(username, password) QVariantMap
        slot +logout(token) bool
        slot +checkAuth(token) bool
        slot +getIdentity(token) QVariantMap
    }

    namespace User Storage {
        class IUserStorage {
            <<interface>>
            +authenticate(username, password_hash) QString?
            +getUserInfo(id) UserInfo
        }
        class QSqlUserStorage {
            -userConfig
            -QSqlDataBase db
            +authenticate(username, password_hash) QString?
            +getUserVersion(id) QString?
        }
    }

    namespace Auth Storage {
        class IAuthStorage {
            <<interface>>
            +authenticate(username, password_hash) QString
            +get(token) QPair~QString, QString~ ?
            +remove(token) bool
        }
        class MemoryAuthStorage {
            #authConfig
            -token2user
            -mt19937 gen;
            +authenticate(username, password_hash) QString
            +get(token) QPair~QString, QString~ ?
            +remove(token) bool
        }
    }

    AuthService o-- IUserStorage: aggregation
    AuthService o-- IAuthStorage: aggregation
    QSqlUserStorage o-- IUserConfig: aggregation
    MemoryAuthStorage o-- IAuthConfig: aggregation
    AuthService o-- IServiceConfig: aggregation
    IAuthStorage --|> MemoryAuthStorage: implements
    IUserStorage --|> QSqlUserStorage: implements
    IUserConfig --|> JsonConfiguration: implements
    IAuthConfig --|> JsonConfiguration: implements
    IServiceConfig --|> JsonConfiguration: implements
```

#### Component Details

1. **AuthService** — the main authentication service, providing the following methods:
    - `login(username, password)` — user authentication
    - `logout(token)` — session termination
    - `checkAuth(token)` — token validity check
    - `getIdentity(token)` — retrieving user information\
      The service uses dependency injection through
      **AuthServiceSettings**, which allows flexible storage configuration.
2. **IUserStorage** — interface for interacting with the user storage. Main methods:
    - `authenticate(username, password)` — user authentication
    - `getUserVersion(username)` — retrieving user data version
3. **IAuthStorage** — interface for interacting with the session storage. Main methods:
    - `authenticate(username, userVersion)` — creating a new session
    - `get(auth_id)` — retrieving user data by token
    - `remove(auth_id)` — session deletion
4. **QSqlUserStorage** — implementation of IUserStorage for working with an SQL database. Supports configuration through
   environment variables:
    - `DATABASE_HOST` — host *(default depends on the driver)*
    - `DATABASE_SCHEMA` — schema *(default "public")*
    - `DATABASE_DRIVER` — driver
    - `DATABASE_PORT` — port *(default depends on the driver)*
    - `DATABASE_NAME` — name *(default depends on the driver)*
    - `DATABASE_USER` — user *(default is the username under which the application is run)*
    - `DATABASE_PASSWORD` — password
5. **MemAuthStorage** — a simple implementation of **IAuthStorage**, storing data in memory.
   Uses a hash table for quick data access.

### Extending the Authentication Service

#### Creating a Custom User Storage

To create a custom user storage, you need to:

1. Create a class inheriting from **IUserStorage**
2. Implement all virtual interface methods
3. Register the storage in **AuthServiceSettings**

Example:

```c++
class CustomUserStorage : public IUserStorage {
public:
    std::optional<QString> authenticate(const QString &username, const QString &password) override {
        // Authentication implementation
    }

    std::optional<QString> getUserVersion(const QString &username) override {
        // Implementation of retrieving user version
    }
};

// Usage
AuthServiceSettings settings;
settings.userStorages.push_back(std::make_unique<CustomUserStorage>());
auto authService = new AuthService(std::move(settings));
```

#### Creating a Custom Session Storage

To create a custom session storage:

1. Create a class inheriting from **IAuthStorage**
2. Implement all virtual interface methods
3. Set the storage in **AuthServiceSettings**

Example:

```c++
class CustomAuthStorage : public IAuthStorage {
public:
    QString authenticate(const QString &username, const QString &userVersion) override {
        // Token creation implementation
    }

    std::optional<QPair<QString, QString>> get(const QString &auth_id) override {
        // Implementation of retrieving data by token
    }

    bool remove(const QString &auth_id) override {
        // Implementation of token deletion
    }
};

// Usage
AuthServiceSettings settings;
settings.authStorage = std::make_unique<CustomAuthStorage>();
auto authService = new AuthService(std::move(settings));
```

#### Support for Multiple User Storages

The system supports the simultaneous use of multiple user storages.
This allows separating users by different data sources.

Example:

```c++
AuthServiceSettings settings;

// Adding multiple user storages
settings.userStorages.push_back(std::make_unique<QSqlUserStorage>());
settings.userStorages.push_back(std::make_unique<LdapUserStorage>());
settings.userStorages.push_back(std::make_unique<CustomUserStorage>());

// Setting the session storage
settings.authStorage = std::make_unique<MemAuthStorage>();

auto authService = new AuthService(std::move(settings));
```

#### Security

When implementing custom storages, consider:

- Storing passwords in encrypted/hashed form
- Using salt during hashing
- Validating input data

Commit message:

chore: add information about JWT verification into README's

README.MD, after:

[Russian](/README_RU.MD)

> [!WARNING] jwt-cpp
> Currently, [cpp-jwt](https://github.com/arun11299/cpp-jwt) is used as the JWT library.
> In the future, this library will be replaced by [cpp-jwt](https://github.com/Thalhammer/jwt-cpp).

## Technical Description of the Json-RPC-Based Authentication System

### Usage Example

Direct usage:

```c++
// Service configuration
AuthServiceSettings settings;
settings.userStorages.push_back(std::make_unique<QSqlUserStorage>());
settings.authStorage = std::make_unique<MemAuthStorage>();

// Service creation
auto authService = new AuthService(std::move(settings));

// Authentication
auto result = authService->login("username", "password");
if (result.contains("error")) {
    // Error handling
} else {
    QString token = result["token"].toString();
    // Token usage
}

// Authentication check
bool isAuthenticated = authService->checkAuth(token);

// Session termination
authService->logout(token);
```

Creating an HTTP Json-RPC service:

```c++
#include <QtCore>
#include <auth_service.h>
#include <qjsonrpc/qjsonrpchttpserver.h>
#include <user_storage/qsql_user_storage.h>
#include <auth_storage/mem_auth_storage.h>

int main() {
   QCoreApplication app(argc, argv);
   
   QJsonRpcHttpServer rpcServer;
   AuthServiceSettings authSettings;
   
   authSettings.authStorage = std::make_unique<MemAuthStorage>();
   authSettings.userStorages.emplace_back(std::move(std::make_unique<QSqlUserStorage>()));
   
   rpcServer.addService(new AuthService(std::move(authSettings), &rpcServer));
   if (!rpcServer.listen(QHostAddress::LocalHost, 7777)) {
      std::cerr << "Failed to start server" << std::endl;
      return 1;
   }
   
   return app.exec();
}
```

### Authorization verification

The current implementation uses a symmetric signature to verify the authenticity of the token(HS256). The authenticity 
of the token is verified by a single "SECRET", which is located in the service configuration (`config.json'). The 
current implementation does not provide for the absence of a "SECRET" in the configuration, but this will be fixed in 
the future. In addition to using (HS256), an "RS256" signature method will be provided to enable the provision of a 
public key for token validation by other services. In the current implementation, the token has no lifetime. Perhaps 
this behavior will be revised with the creation of two tokens (access and refresh)

### Architecture

#### Architecture Overview

The authentication system is built on a modular architecture, divided into several key components:

- **AuthService** — the main service providing a JSON-RPC API for authentication
- **IUserStorage** — interface for interacting with the user storage
- **IAuthStorage** — interface for interacting with the session storage
- **QSqlUserStorage** — implementation of IUserStorage for working with an SQL database
- **MemAuthStorage** — implementation of IAuthStorage for storing sessions in memory

```mermaid
---
title: Server Architecture
---
classDiagram
    direction LR

    namespace Configuration {
        class IServiceConfig {
            <<interface>>
            +getServiceConfig(name) QJsonValue
        }
        class IUserConfig {
            <<interface>>
            +getUserConfig(name) QJsonValue
        }
        class IAuthConfig {
            <<interface>>
            +getAuthConfig(name) QJsonValue
        }
        class JsonConfiguration {
            +getServiceConfig(name) QJsonValue
            +getAuthConfig(name) QJsonValue
            +getAuthConfig(name) QJsonValue
        }
    }

    class AuthService {
        #auths
        #users
        #serviceConfig
        slot +login(username, password) QVariantMap
        slot +logout(token) bool
        slot +checkAuth(token) bool
        slot +getIdentity(token) QVariantMap
    }

    namespace User Storage {
        class IUserStorage {
            <<interface>>
            +authenticate(username, password_hash) QString?
            +getUserInfo(id) UserInfo
        }
        class QSqlUserStorage {
            -userConfig
            -QSqlDataBase db
            +authenticate(username, password_hash) QString?
            +getUserVersion(id) QString?
        }
    }

    namespace Auth Storage {
        class IAuthStorage {
            <<interface>>
            +authenticate(username, password_hash) QString
            +get(token) QPair~QString, QString~ ?
            +remove(token) bool
        }
        class MemoryAuthStorage {
            #authConfig
            -token2user
            -mt19937 gen;
            +authenticate(username, password_hash) QString
            +get(token) QPair~QString, QString~ ?
            +remove(token) bool
        }
    }

    AuthService o-- IUserStorage: aggregation
    AuthService o-- IAuthStorage: aggregation
    QSqlUserStorage o-- IUserConfig: aggregation
    MemoryAuthStorage o-- IAuthConfig: aggregation
    AuthService o-- IServiceConfig: aggregation
    IAuthStorage --|> MemoryAuthStorage: implements
    IUserStorage --|> QSqlUserStorage: implements
    IUserConfig --|> JsonConfiguration: implements
    IAuthConfig --|> JsonConfiguration: implements
    IServiceConfig --|> JsonConfiguration: implements
```

#### Component Details

1. **AuthService** — the main authentication service, providing the following methods:
    - `login(username, password)` — user authentication
    - `logout(token)` — session termination
    - `checkAuth(token)` — token validity check
    - `getIdentity(token)` — retrieving user information\
      The service uses dependency injection through
      **AuthServiceSettings**, which allows flexible storage configuration.
2. **IUserStorage** — interface for interacting with the user storage. Main methods:
    - `authenticate(username, password)` — user authentication
    - `getUserVersion(username)` — retrieving user data version
3. **IAuthStorage** — interface for interacting with the session storage. Main methods:
    - `authenticate(username, userVersion)` — creating a new session
    - `get(auth_id)` — retrieving user data by token
    - `remove(auth_id)` — session deletion
4. **QSqlUserStorage** — implementation of IUserStorage for working with an SQL database. Supports configuration through
   environment variables:
    - `DATABASE_HOST` — host *(default depends on the driver)*
    - `DATABASE_SCHEMA` — schema *(default "public")*
    - `DATABASE_DRIVER` — driver
    - `DATABASE_PORT` — port *(default depends on the driver)*
    - `DATABASE_NAME` — name *(default depends on the driver)*
    - `DATABASE_USER` — user *(default is the username under which the application is run)*
    - `DATABASE_PASSWORD` — password
5. **MemAuthStorage** — a simple implementation of **IAuthStorage**, storing data in memory.
   Uses a hash table for quick data access.

### Extending the Authentication Service

#### Creating a Custom User Storage

To create a custom user storage, you need to:

1. Create a class inheriting from **IUserStorage**
2. Implement all virtual interface methods
3. Register the storage in **AuthServiceSettings**

Example:

```c++
class CustomUserStorage : public IUserStorage {
public:
    std::optional<QString> authenticate(const QString &username, const QString &password) override {
        // Authentication implementation
    }

    std::optional<QString> getUserVersion(const QString &username) override {
        // Implementation of retrieving user version
    }
};

// Usage
AuthServiceSettings settings;
settings.userStorages.push_back(std::make_unique<CustomUserStorage>());
auto authService = new AuthService(std::move(settings));
```

#### Creating a Custom Session Storage

To create a custom session storage:

1. Create a class inheriting from **IAuthStorage**
2. Implement all virtual interface methods
3. Set the storage in **AuthServiceSettings**

Example:

```c++
class CustomAuthStorage : public IAuthStorage {
public:
    QString authenticate(const QString &username, const QString &userVersion) override {
        // Token creation implementation
    }

    std::optional<QPair<QString, QString>> get(const QString &auth_id) override {
        // Implementation of retrieving data by token
    }

    bool remove(const QString &auth_id) override {
        // Implementation of token deletion
    }
};

// Usage
AuthServiceSettings settings;
settings.authStorage = std::make_unique<CustomAuthStorage>();
auto authService = new AuthService(std::move(settings));
```

#### Support for Multiple User Storages

The system supports the simultaneous use of multiple user storages.
This allows separating users by different data sources.

Example:

```c++
AuthServiceSettings settings;

// Adding multiple user storages
settings.userStorages.push_back(std::make_unique<QSqlUserStorage>());
settings.userStorages.push_back(std::make_unique<LdapUserStorage>());
settings.userStorages.push_back(std::make_unique<CustomUserStorage>());

// Setting the session storage
settings.authStorage = std::make_unique<MemAuthStorage>();

auto authService = new AuthService(std::move(settings));
```

#### Security

When implementing custom storages, consider:

- Storing passwords in encrypted/hashed form
- Using salt during hashing
- Validating input data
